Mason, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Fantastic to have you here.
It's great to be here.
Long time listener.
Oh, wonderful.
Yeah, I'm definitely a fan of stuff
I've seen you doing online as well.
And it's super cool to get together here
and share it with a couple of people.
Yeah, definitely excited.
Yeah, cool.
And Temporal, wow, what a cool topic, durable execution.
What a neat idea that I've seen in other places,
but I've seen less of it in Python.
So I'm real excited to dive into this.
This is something I learned about recently.
We'll go into that in a bit, but there's a lot here.
Let's just leave it like this could be a two-hour show
and we'd still be going easy.
Definitely, yeah.
I spend a lot of my time educating people
about durable execution.
That's what my role is.
I'm one of the developer educators at Temporal.
And definitely you could spend hours on this and we could be going forever.
So, yeah.
Yeah, and we definitely could.
Well, before we do go on for hours, who are you?
Who's Mason?
Well, yeah.
My name is Mason Egger.
I am a developer educator at Temporal, as I mentioned.
And I also help run the PyTexas conference.
So, PyTexas is one of the oldest, actually the oldest regional Python conference in the world that we know of.
no one else has come to claim that spot yet we started in the late fall of 2007
like right after PyCon US would have started we'll be experiencing our 20th year this upcoming year
which is exciting and I also am the president of the PyTexas Foundation so PyTexas has its own
501c3 organization that is used to basically act as a sheltering organization for all of the Python
meetups and events that go on within the state of Texas which is really nice so I was elected
president of that back in 2002. I've been helping run and build the Python community there ever
since. And it's a lot of work, but it's a lot of fun. And I really enjoy my community work.
Yeah, it sounds extremely fun. Although also challenging. You say for the entire state of
Texas, Texas is a big place. It's like countries as well. If you look at the size of Texas.
It really is. Texas
has some unique issues with it when it comes to running community stuff.
We founded our own virtual meetup for basically anyone in Texas and anyone else can join,
obviously, too. We don't say, oh, no, no Texans can join it. But we did it because the amount
of feedback we would get, it's like, oh, I live in, say, the DFW area, the Dallas-Fort Worth area,
and I would love to go to the meetup, but I live two hours away from the meetup because of how
large the Texas cities are. Texas cities are sprawling metroplexes. I grew up in the Houston
area. And the joke when you grew up in Houston is you're always three hours away by car from every
other part of Houston. And that really is the case. So it does have its own set of unique challenges
trying to coordinate four major cities across, you know, technically two time zones. If we can,
if we include El Paso,
the very,
very edge, the very west part of Texas is in the mountain time
zone. So it's an interesting bit of work. And we've been doing a really good job of expanding
and like adding more and more offerings that we can offer to the community year over year. And it's
been a lot of fun. And I really enjoy it. It keeps me busy. That's for sure.
Yeah, I could say. Is that why people drive so fast in Texas? They've got so far to go?
Exactly. Yes. I mean, the fastest speed limit in the United States is on the highway next to my
house. It's 85 miles an hour. And it's on the toll road next to my house. Because you're right,
Like if you're trying to get from Austin to San Antonio, that's I think it's about 100 miles down.
And like if you're going 55, you'll get there in, you know, two and a half hours.
But I can make it in an hour and a half hour and 15 minutes if you just let me fly.
I had no idea.
Fly by car.
Exactly.
I had no idea that the speed of my car.
I knew they were high, but not that high in Texas.
Yep.
Wild, you know.
You guys in Germany, come on.
Yeah, it is.
It is the it is the Southern Autobahn, basically.
Fantastic. So you've had a bit of a tougher challenge, I suppose, more
challenges than a lot of people with this whole Pie Texas thing, which I've
always thought was super cool. I'd love to go sometime. It's far from Oregon,
but still would be really lovely. That said, you started working on this COVID
time, right? Which for conferences is the kiss of death. You want to talk us
through how that went?
Yeah, I could definitely talk about that for a while. So I got involved
in conference organizing, as most people do by first speaking at the conference. So I spoke at
the conference in 2019. I had been a PyCon attendee prior to that. My first PyCon attendance was the
last Portland one, which I believe was 2017. And then spoke at PyTexas in 2019 and volunteered to
help for the 2020 conference. And that was really interesting because, you know, we had planned to do
it in person. I think everybody had planned, was planning in person 2020, you know, because you,
for those that don't know, when you start planning a conference, you start planning about eight,
10 months prior. So if you're a spring conference as PyTexas is, we were planning,
you know, PyTexas 2020 in about summer of 2019. No one knew what was coming.
We were so innocent then. Yes. We were so innocent.
We
really were. So we were planning that. And then, you know, the events that we know of happened and we kept chasing it. We kept pushing it back. I think a lot of conferences at that time kept pushing back thinking, oh, we'll be out of this in two weeks. We'll be out of this in three months.
We ended up going virtual.
And then in 2021, we made the conscious decision to just not have a conference.
The virtual conference for us in 2020 wasn't overly successful.
And at that time, we were feeling there was just a lot of virtual conference fatigue.
And we didn't have a really good story on how to make it work and dedicate the time.
Everybody was also struggling to handle the world at that time.
So being able to put more resources into it.
was difficult. So we pushed that off and then we came back in 2022. We made a very conscious
decision about it. Like we were like, we're going to come back in the safest way possible. PyCon US
had announced they were coming back. We decided we were going to come back. We have a venue that
has custom air filtration. We instilled mask mandates and vaccine mandates and all of that
stuff. And we had 76 people return. But we knew that if we didn't come back, if we let this kind
of like continue on, that the likelihood of getting the community to come back, that the memory
is short that if we didn't come back, we might lose it forever. And
having
run this for 18 years,
we were concerned about losing it at that point.
That's, I think that's totally valid. Like a lot
of this conference attending is it's habit. You form either you've gone a bunch of times. You
really enjoy it. Like, yeah, of course I'm going to go. You don't even question like, well, when is
it? I'm just going to sign up when it comes out. But you know, if
you stop
going, then I think that
does make a big change. So it
definitely does. So in 22, we, we did it and then we kept coming back.
And then, you know, every year prior after that, we, we continue to grow. it took us three
years to get back to above, what, what I would consider pre pandemic normals. and the,
the fun fact about that is, and the thing that I think that, really kind of helped us out is
like, we didn't really start seeing the growth back in the conference attendance until us as the
foundation turned our inwards local or our, sorry, our vision local or our site to start focusing on
the local meetups because the local meetup scene had not returned. And that was the vast majority
of our, of our, of our marketing was that we would send out these emails and stuff, or the local
meetups would promote us. And these are huge meetups. I mean, the Python, the, the, some of
the Python meetups in Texas are some of the oldest meetups that I, that I know of. I mean, like they,
they started in the, in the early, in the late aughts in the early teens.
Yeah. I would say they probably were not even called meetups when they started,
right? The user
groups or something. They predate
meetup, meetup.com and all that.
Yeah. They're, they're, I think the, the pie Houston meetup group is called like their,
their tag on meetup.com is Python dash 14. So I'm assuming it was the fourth,
14th Python meetup when it was created in the world on meetup.com. So, and you know,
large groups, but these meetups had gone dormant. So what I did as, as foundation president at that
time was I was like, okay, I'm going to spend all of my effort while my organizers are helping get
the conference going. I'm going to spend all of my effort finding organizers and rebuilding these
meetups in these areas. so I would connect with people that I knew in the area. I would reach
out to friends. I would put out all calls and after time of rebuilding the ecosystem, then we
basically everything came back to life. And that's kind of where a little, you know, the things that
have learned is that if your meetup ecosystem is not healthy, then your regional Python conference
ecosystem will not be healthy because it has to feed up into it.
Yeah.
I think it's such a challenge to run like a conference or a podcast or whatever
to draw in new people. I mean, you can do all the amazing mailing lists and announcements and
everything but you're speaking to your existing people that know about you and finding new ones
it's really interesting and this cultivating like user groups to sort of be the foundation
it's a very interesting idea definitely
user groups work i think we also started the pie texas meetup
um which was a virtual meetup that we do monthly that we allow anyone to join and we cultivated
amongst our network of friends and social media and word of mouth and then we all know what
what happened with the social media situation, which really did not help. I mean, there was a
lot of just a lot of things that have happened with like, like the dissolution of Twitter,
um, really did not help the conference in the tech ecosystem. Basically we've all fractured
now we're all in like six different places. Like the move to Mastodon is not complete. blue
sky had its moment, but I honestly get less engagement on blue sky than anything else.
LinkedIn has
surprisingly been my, our most successful, social media platform. Um,
it seems like a lot of people have moved there for some reason or another.
so, but not basically it means that you just have to reapply your marketing,
strategies.
And the fun thing that I've had, I've had the benefit of is that I, as my work as a developer
advocate, all the roles that I have done, they tend to sit in marketing.
developer advocacy tends to either sit in product or marketing, all the one, the roles
that I have taken sit in marketing.
And I've had the benefit of like, whenever this has started going weird or I can ask all
of my marketing friends, Hey, what would you do in this situation?
and how would you
approach this?
So I've got to learn through osmosis,
kind of how marketing stuff works
and being able to apply that
to conference organizing and meetup organizing
has actually been substantially beneficial to us.
Yeah, certainly I think companies
that are turned on enough to have developer advocates
have developer intelligent marketing teams
and that's a real resource.
Definitely, yeah.
It's been really useful to be able to get other people's opinions
and then just ask other conference organizers,
what are they doing?
I think that finding out what works and telling other people about it.
I mean, I haven't had a chance to write this year's blog post yet, unfortunately, for this
year's conference.
But whenever I became conference chair and then president, I was like, we're going to
be as transparent as possible.
Every misstep we make, we're going to blog about it.
We talk about our budget.
I mean, we're also a 501c3, so that's kind of like part of our bylaws.
But at the same time, it's like, this is everything that we do.
You can find it on all of our websites.
And this is what worked.
This is what didn't because there's so many first time conference organizers who may want to start a conference who don't know how to achieve these goals or whatever they're trying to do.
And we have 20 years of experience doing it.
And like it, we need to help each other out and make sure that we distill this, this knowledge outward.
I don't have 20 years of experience.
I'm only doing it for four, but you know, institutional knowledge.
There are, there are Google docs with like years of back data that I can go and look
at and be like, Oh yeah.
In 2009, we ordered way too many meals because we, you know, didn't charge enough for, we
didn't charge anything for tickets.
Like Pike seconds used to be a free conference.
And basically when you don't charge anything for tickets, one of the lessons that we learned
is that people will just sign up for a ticket and then not show up.
And then your, your catering gets all kind of out of whack.
So even charging just a little bit of money, like five bucks, I think like we charge like
$5 for our network event.
It's not because I need the $5.
I mean, I've told, I've told my, we spend, I think $30 per person on the food.
It's like, it's to make sure that you have a little bit of like skin in the game to make
sure that you show up so I can get an accurate head count for the, for the, for the catering.
So we
don't blow
the budget by $10,000.
Like
I'm not envious of that.
I certainly it's easy to just check a checkbox.
Yeah.
I'm interested.
Why not?
Yeah.
If, if I come.
Yeah,
exactly.
Exactly.
All right.
Awesome.
Well, congratulations out in the audience.
June Army says, yay, Pie Texas Foundation.
That's pretty awesome.
Yeah.
All right.
Well, let's talk temporal.
Now, I came across this a few weeks ago from this.
You know, I think this ironically, I think this might be the blue sky that I came across it on.
Interesting.
No.
Okay.
It was on X.
There's still apparently stuff that happens on there.
I miss Twitter.
And people
post weird
comments on
reviews on the show like,
oh, you know,
they said they don't like Twitter, so they must be
whatever. No.
It used to be so active and it's not so
active.
Put aside everything else.
It used
to be like you could have a
great conversation and you
still can, but it's so much less than it used
to be.
It's an easy explanation.
The signal to noise ratio is completely messed up
now.
It
used to be such a
much better place because everybody was posting there and there wasn't as much noise. And now
the signal to noise ratio makes it almost unintelligible to be able to find anything of any
use. And that's the number one problem with it. And
you pay for attention. And there's six other
places, like you said. So
anyway, so I
found this
post from we'll work it backwards from Pietro
says people aren't talking enough about how most of open AI's tech stack runs on Python,
which I thought was a super cool post.
It comes from the Pragmatic Engineer newsletter,
and it talks about how most of the product's code is written in Python,
uses FastAPI, C for certain parts.
And then, so all that stuff made sense.
I'm like, yep, yep.
Then Temporal, used for asynchronous workflows.
I'm like, what is Temporal?
And then I think you sent me a message and said,
hey, I would love to talk to you about Temporal.
And I looked at him and I'm like, yeah, this is super cool.
So that's how I learned about you guys, which I thought was pretty neat.
And yeah, let's talk about it.
What is Temporal?
Yeah.
So Temporal is essentially what we call a durable execution platform.
And it's durable execution is kind of a new term or a new like field within the zeitgeist,
as you would call it.
And we're
kind of going with like what we're calling crash proof execution.
And the way that we kind of talk about it now is like, essentially, it handles the failure
state of your of your applications and ensures that your code will continue execution regardless
of the failures that it encounters.
So say, for example, you have a application that's making a couple calls out to a microservice.
OK, and that microservice goes temporarily down.
you as the developer would have to traditionally write a whole bunch of logic around handling that
failure. Okay. So we have to detect that the failure has happened. what type of error
did we receive now? Now, what do we do? Do we back off and retry? Do we, do we decide that this
failure is non-retriable and we just don't do it? Like the difference between we're not authenticated
versus a 404, those are completely different failure handling modes. and then, so there's
all of this kind of logic that you have to build into handle failure. temporal basically
abstracts this away from you. So whenever you have a function call or a method call in Python
when implemented with Temporal, you automatically get retries, for example, by default. So you get
this declarative policy that happens. There's a default policy, and it will automatically retry
your application or your call until eventually it comes back online. Because let's be honest,
in most distributed systems like this, those are most of the time intermittent failures.
Like a microservice going offline, are you being rate limited?
Those are usually fixable with a little bit of time and some retries.
Now, there are other
cases where
they're not, but that's like the default policy.
That's the default use case or the default like for retries alone.
And then there's a lot of other cases.
So Temporal maintains the application state of your application.
And so say you have like a Python application that has 10 steps in it and you get through
step five and then the python application were to crash for some reason out of memory uh maybe your
kubernetes pod got descheduled something like this and production happens happens all the time this
is as a former sre this was this was the life that i
lived
for years
um yeah even hey there's a
security patch for the Linux server that's the
yeah running
this and we got to restart it and like uh
we have to reboot yeah and now yes it's not long but like
stuff is going on exactly
so now you have
when you have to deal with that, you're like, okay, so do we let everything get through and
risk the attack surface? Or do we like, or then you have to make the calculus. Do we just
kill all the processes and then wait for, and then restart them? And what's the cost on the
restart? And then redoing all of that logic. Did they make any rights to the database? Do we have
to worry about like cleaning all that? There's all of this conversation. So since Temporal
maintains that application state, that becomes a lot simpler because as we, I think we kind of
alluded to it, but I'll state it outright. When that application crashes, and in a typical
application, you have to start back over from the beginning, and you have to replay, you basically
re-execute everything you did, unless you have some advanced event sourcing style model where
you are keeping track of it. Temporal does
this by
default. So it maintains the event history,
what's called an event history, of your application. And what that does is every time a,
basically it creates checkpoints. Every time a function executes, it stores the result of it,
it. And if that application were to crash, it will reschedule it onto another worker. That's what
they're called in temporal. And we'll get into that in a minute within your fleet, re reconstruct
the state of that application up into that point of failure, and then continue onward as if the
failure had never happened. And more often than not, this happens without the developer even being
aware of it. Like no, no alarms will go off unless you personally do them because this is the design
of the system. It's to ensure that in spite of failure, your application will continue executing.
Yeah, that's awesome. And there's a bunch of neat ways in which that happens, which we'll talk about. But I think one mental model people should maybe think about when they consider these is it centralizes a lot of the error handling and the retry code and all of that stuff. So a lot of your application becomes simpler, not more complex.
Exactly. Yes. That's actually one of the main feedback things that we get from people is,
you know, all of this, there's so many mechanisms. There's so many actually like patterns that we
have now built to handle all of these kinds of things. Event sourcing, event-driven architecture,
saga pattern, all of these different like CQRS, like all of these different distributed systems
patterns that exist to handle all of these things. And Temporal basically abstracts away a lot of them
And you get them basically for free out of the box with the project.
And it does make your code a lot simpler.
It makes it a lot more contained.
So you can walk through it straight down.
Basically, almost as like it's a workflow.
You know, the core primitive of temporal is called a workflow.
We don't tend to like to refer to ourself as a workflow engine.
But some people will say that.
I typically don't correct them on it.
If that's what it takes for people to understand that's what it is, fine.
But durable execution is the actual phrase.
It's a meaty topic.
it's kind of hard for people to like kind of wrap their heads around it.
So I'm like, let's get you to understanding it.
And then we'll correct the little tidbits here and there.
Yeah, excellent.
So, you know, people are probably familiar with NX stamina or with tenacity,
which is interesting where you might put a decorator onto a function and say,
hey,
if this fails, instead of just crashing, try it again.
Yeah.
maybe a few times, maybe with exponential back off.
And this is kind of a single thread of execution type of form of durability a little bit, right?
Where it's like this function now becomes somewhat more reliable based on like maybe the service comes back
or maybe your network comes back or whatever it happened to be that caused this particular example.
But with temporal, it's a lot broader, right?
Like every step, it saves the state.
If something goes wrong, it can basically resume.
I guess maybe this resumable idea is
like one
of the big difference, right?
It's like let's take our reboot the server example.
Let's suppose
we got some service that we work on that our app depends upon.
We had to reboot it.
Now what?
It happens.
Yeah.
So, I mean, yeah, you have a service that our app depends on.
We had to reboot it.
So if the service, so we're assuming our service is on an external
machine and
it's
calling out.
Yeah, for some reason.
Yeah, or maybe it's a Docker container and we rebuilt the Docker container.
It takes five seconds to start.
Something like that.
Yeah.
So our service is calling out to it.
It will basically retry until that comes back online.
Now, if we were to reboot our service, say our service was running and we rebooted the container that contained it,
It would basically, you know, if we're in a Kubernetes system, the Kubernetes scheduler would probably reschedule it onto another, you know, node within the pod.
And then it would reconstruct.
And what happens is there's actually a sort of the temporal exists as a kind of kind of an orchestrator executor model, like a service worker model.
So the service maintains the history.
So what will happen is whenever that new service comes online or whenever the new execution comes online, you know, we've rebooted it.
It got rescheduled.
It comes online.
It will stream the old history from the service and then reconstruct it, basically going step by step through it.
And so like the function, you know, function A that was executed, the input and output values are stored in that event history.
So the output value, it's like, oh, we successfully completed execution of function A, store that in variable foo, and then continue onward.
And then we can continue reconstructing that service up until it gets to the point where it's like, okay, we have no more events in the history about what happened.
So now we know we have reconstructed successfully.
Now we continue forward and execute as if nothing had happened.
Yeah.
So in your non-durable execution code, you might have try, accept, do something else.
You might have stuff like stamina or tenacity where you're like, okay, we're going to try this again.
There's a lot of that kind of code that you write.
And in this
world, you could just say like top to bottom, write the happy path, which is great.
And then what happens is Temporal says, okay, I tried to run this.
It failed.
So we'll reschedule it with a back off or something along those lines.
Right.
So you can, you can basically not deal with a lot of this and get visibility into the
errors and the state of flow by
letting the
orchestrator manage that.
Right.
Yes.
And there are there.
I'm, I'm, I'm covering like the top 10% of all the different features.
There are so many interesting other features that Temporal provides as an ecosystem.
So one of the other really neat ones is that we provide a really simple way for things to do a human-in-the-loop interaction.
So you can very easily send in what's called a signal.
So basically sending in data into a running execution and then basically doing some processing on it.
So you're waiting on a confirmed signal from someone.
Your application is doing something.
You're waiting on a confirm.
You can send that in directly into the workflow.
And then that will basically be, that's persisted again, within the events, within the event
history.
So if it crashes after that confirmation, that confirmation is stored as well.
So you have that, you have the ability to do long running schedules.
So there's like, there's some cron syntax, like what's what are called schedules in temporal.
There's the ability to do,
what are they called?
I forgot off the top of my head.
Oh no, they left.
There's so many different features in Temporal that are that are just really neat and can solve a lot of the problems that you're trying to do.
And scaling becomes super easy as well.
So like you want to scale, just add more workers to the fleet.
That's that's the easiest thing you can do is just add more of these workers and they basically can be executed across all of your different fleets.
So the scaling story is super awesome as well.
Yeah, there's we'll get into it.
There's definitely some examples of.
Yeah.
large scale use cases, you know, high, high frequency use cases of these things.
But going back to the timing, you know, what if your user onboarding looks more
like, I guess you could be real simple.
You could say in order to create a user account, I have to first have them create
an, you know, enter their username and email or their email and their password.
And then I'm going to send them an email and they got to take an action based on
that, right?
That would be pretty common, like a long running type of thing you could consider.
But for some of these systems, it's like, and prove who you are and upload a document.
That's a picture of your ID and somebody will look at it and go, yeah, that looks real enough.
And they check a box or, you know, those kinds of much longer onboarding things.
Something like that could be modeled with temporal pretty easily, it sounds like.
Yeah.
So long running workflows are the other, that was the feature I couldn't remember, which was timers.
And I have no idea why that left my mind.
It's one of my favorite features.
Long running workflows are one of the like amazing use cases of Temporal.
So because everything is maintained in this, in that state and basically crashing doesn't
really matter because we can just reconstruct the state.
You can have workflows or you can have your executions that can last for days, weeks,
years.
This is kind of what we know at work.
We kind of known as the entity workflow pattern.
So essentially like a user who's going through an onboarding process, you know, like you just
And I think the identity workflow process is actually one of our exact sample applications.
So, you know, like you're right, they lay sign up and they have to upload some forms of ID.
Someone has to check it.
It has to go through maybe a background check process and all of that.
That's a long running workflow.
That could take days.
That could take weeks, depending on what kind of background check you're getting done.
Temporal can suspend its state for however long it wants, you know, and we can guarantee that it will come back online.
So the interesting thing, and whenever you ever, if you ever see Temporal at a booth at a conference, we were at PyCon this year, for example, our code sample on our booth has a really interesting statement that always catches people's eye, and it's a little mini workflow, and it's sending emails.
And what it does is it says sleep for 30 days.
And nobody in their right mind would actually write a sleep for 30 days in code and expect it to actually function.
100% works exactly the way you would expect it to in Temporal, and we can guarantee that it works.
because of the way that Temporal is architected,
those timers basically exist on the servers,
on the Temporal service side,
and they just get,
basically your workflow just gets scheduled to resume
after the timer has fired.
So
you can
guarantee that long running workflows
will complete exactly the way that you expect them to.
So yeah, long running workflows,
amazing use case for Temporal.
Yeah, it sounds incredible.
Now, I do want to dive actually,
and it's super interesting
how y'all made this happen in Python,
but I do want to just maybe talk about,
the scale, like if I were to run temporal, now you guys have a cloud. So I guess stepping just
a bit back, this is MIT license, but you also have pricing. Yes. Before we go into what I was
going to talk about, like, let's talk about that, that difference there, that contrast.
Yeah. What's the story?
So temporal is a hundred percent open source, MIT license. So there's
the temporal service and then there's the temporal SDKs. Every single one of our temporal SDKs are,
and the service and everything is MIT licensed forever and always. Our founders are big,
big fans of that. The only SDK that is not is the Java SDK, which is Apache 2. And if you know
anything about open source licensing, there is basically a dependency further up the tree that
was Apache 2. And you're not allowed to downgrade licensing if you ever make a derivative. So that's
the only reason that one is, but every one of our other licenses is MIT licensed. So you could run
Temporal open source and be fine. The thing that we have found is that at scale, the service itself
is challenging and requires large SRE teams to run. Because essentially what we're doing is we're
offering distributed systems as a service. We're offering reliability as a service. Just because
we have abstracted these problems away from someone does not mean that the price does not
stuff to be paid by someone. And I'm talking about the metaphorical price, not the dollar price.
Someone still has to ensure that that database stays up essentially, and that your things are
still getting scheduled and that the network is up and all of these. So it's super complex to do
that. And you can run it. So you can run the temporal service locally. You can run the temporal
workers locally. Everything you run is still local. The pricing model for temporal is just the temporal
service part, which is run in temporal cloud. So there's a, there's a weird misnomer around cloud,
which is like cloud always assumes that we run everything for you. Temporal cloud is different.
Temporal cloud only runs the temporal service, your workers, where your code executes is always
run at least by for now until who knows if another product will ever come out. I don't know.
Is run by you on you in your data center, on your machines. So your code, your execution run by you,
that that service that brain the orchestrator that's the part you could pay temporal cloud for
um right that's the part that does the orchestration the part that handles the
failure and retries and that kind of stuff right yeah well
ted it's the part that actually the
failure retries is handled by the state machines that are built in the sdk it's the part that
basically maintains the event history it maintains the communication mechanisms and it um it is the
orchestrator yeah so uh but so if we use the
cloud i could like reboot my my local data center machine
or even my local data center,
I mean my version of the cloud,
you know, wherever DigitalOcean or whatever.
And when it comes back,
it'll sort of resume along.
Like you guys will see that it's back
and then start running work on something like that.
That's what I was getting at.
Technically, yes.
So fun fact about it.
Again, the architecture of this is so brilliant
and we could get so touched in the weeds about it.
The Temporal Service does not actually know
about any of the workers that are running.
It's always a call out model.
So your machines would come back online,
know that they have things they need to do.
They would basically start listening back.
Everything that happens at Temporal
listens across task queues.
So they would all come back online.
They would start listening again.
And then they would see that there's still work
in the task queues, which the service maintains.
But all the service does, it goes,
oh, someone requested that I do something.
And then it puts it on the task queue
and then the workers handle it.
The true magic of Temporal lies within the state machines
that are built within the SDKs,
but they cannot function without that orchestrator service.
I remember when I first started working on the courses.
So like my primary role is writing courses for Temporal.
And if you go on to our Temporal Learn site,
you can find a lot of our,
I think it's learn.temporal.io.
You can find a lot of our courses.
I wrote the Java and the Python ones.
I remember when I was first writing them,
I kept asking the SDK engineers like,
well, how does the server do this?
How does the server do this?
And one of the engineers was like,
Mason, you're giving the server too much credit.
It's not that smart.
It's really the state machines within the workers
that are doing all the heavy lifting
and the service just maintains it.
But with the long way around,
what the cloud service does is it maintains that database.
So the history.
Without that event history, that is the magic piece.
The event history is the single source of truth
of all things that have happened
and that's what the service provides and maintains.
So whether you use the cloud version of that
or you self-host that, that is up to you.
Now, again, if you self-host it,
You are now responsible for maintaining it.
You are now responsible for upgrading it, security patches, all of that.
And there are multiple case studies.
There are multiple YouTube videos on our channel of people who have gone the self-hosted route
and have found that the cloud route is easier once they've reached a certain scale.
So, yeah, it's pretty neat.
Yeah.
Yeah, cool.
You know, more and more, that's the business side of what works for open source, right?
Yeah.
There's something that you want to do. And then there's another requirement that you're probably not good at. And you guys would be really good at right like for example, making sure that temporal itself is reliable and
fast and keeps
running and that kind of thing right like exactly
yes and I think it does also come down to and this is one of the interesting lessons that I've that I've learned throughout my career is that like, what is your core business is your core business to run and maintain a temporal service is your core business to provide a service to your customers.
And whenever the price of running your own services outweighs what you could have just
paid someone else to do it for, then at that point, you have to take a look at something
and go, maybe I should just pay the provider who has the expertise, who literally all they
do all day long.
Because usually someone's SRE team doesn't full-time dedicate to learning the ins and
outs of a single product.
Like I was an SRE.
I managed a cloud platform for VRBO, for Vrbo.
I knew there was like 12 different applications in that stack.
And the way that I learned about each one was the one that went down that day.
So you're, you're constantly like figuring out what, like you're learning about it as
it's on fire.
It's a terrible way to learn.
and that's, that's just not a great way to run it to, to like live your life.
I found
that's why I
moved into developer education.
exactly.
There's, there's fewer, midnight calls in developer education.
That is the
primary reason why I do this now is I, I, I, like there is a point when the,
when pager duty goes off like one too many times and you become a developer advocate and i'm living
proof of that
you just know yeah you take it off a space style you just take it out put on some uh
gangster music
just exactly right exactly if you don't know the reference you
need to make
sure you put watching office space yeah the
movie right i've driven by the list i've driven by the
area where it was filmed it was filmed out here in austin where i live was
it
incredible yes
Incredible. Okay, so why did I sort of start in that path? What I want to talk about is what is,
so you guys have a cloud version, which obviously does stuff in massive scale.
You talk about a fleet of these things. And by the way,
at the
execution level, we're probably
mostly talking Go and Rust, just so people know, it's kind of like fast innards. But Rakesh asks,
like, it seems to be resourced and sensitive. Is there a lightweight option? Like, what is a
what is a minimal temporal rather than a,
you know,
what Uber does or what, you know,
ChatGPT does. Cause those things, you just can't compare them. Right. It's like, you're not
Microsoft. You're not Google. You're not LinkedIn. You're not Netflix. Don't try to be them most.
Yeah.
It depends on what you're trying to accomplish. So, I mean, like, I think when it
comes to, so there's, there's always, there's the service and then there's the worker fleet. So
let's talk, I'll talk about the service first and then we'll talk about the workers. So the service
comes in a handful of different flavored offerings. There's a local development binary that is meant
to be used for development. And that's what I use on my local laptop all the time. It's also more
than suitable for home lab stuff. So if you're wanting to play with this in your home lab,
use that single binary. It's got an in-memory data store, but you can have it persist to a
SQLite database. We'll get you very, very far on home lab stuff. Non-prod use cases, totally fine.
SQLite is underappreciated.
People see it
as like a toy thing or like I can use this while I'm developing like a sample.
But then I don't really like you can put millions of records in SQLite.
You can go a very long way.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, it is.
Yeah, it is an amazing tool.
It's one of my favorite tools.
And then there.
So in reality, what the way that the temporal service is actually built is it's actually just a single binary.
But the thing is, there are the temporal service is a conglomerate.
When I say the service, I'm like all of the things together.
It's a conglomerate of multiple microservices that when you put them together, they connect
with, they interact with each other.
And there's like four backend services, no, three services and a frontend service.
Then there's like a web UI and that's the service.
But then you also have to build in a data storage.
So for when you get to that point, that's when you either need MySQL, Postgres, or Cassandra.
You could probably get away with SQLite on that one, but I've never actually tried it.
But we recommend MySQL, Postgres, or Cassandra.
And then you can add in other things like elastic for visibility.
You can add Prometheus and Grafana for being able to see.
But this is when you're starting to scale up.
So like if you were doing this on, you know, like small itty bitty scale,
you could probably deploy it onto say a DigitalOcean droplet and be fine with a single binary.
We have tutorials on our learn site on exactly how to do this.
And then it scales.
So like there's a Docker compose file.
So like once you want to see what all these microservices are doing, like in multiple areas,
like you can see how we've deployed all of them and you can play it.
There's multiple different Docker compose files to be like, oh, I want it with this database
and these options.
And that allows you to kind of like tune it and tweak it to your liking.
And then once you get to prod scale, we have Helm charts that we support and you can deploy
it directly into Kubernetes.
Now, if you're self-hosting in production, Kubernetes tends to be what we see in the
wild as the most popular deployment.
Now, again, these are single binaries.
You can deploy it however you want.
So it has a from development to prod.
It has a very nice scaling story.
or the other option is just go to Temporal Cloud.
The thing is Temporal Cloud has a minimum pricing structure for it,
which we're constantly updating.
And that's really useful once you get to actual production use cases
and you have people paying you
and you can use that money to pay for the Temporal Cloud.
It's not a lot.
The Temporal Cloud pricing is super...
I think it's really super interestingly well done
because it's based on what we call actions.
So like anything that basically causes a right to that durable database, you get billed on like fractions of a penny.
So it's consumption based.
The main thing is making sure you have enough traffic to cover.
Basically, there's a minimum support cost that you have to pay for like a minimum bill requirement.
And then you get billed on the actions and making sure you have enough traffic and workload to handle that.
I know.
And then you get a lot of other cool features in cloud that.
that, I have to make sure I say this carefully, that you don't get on the open source version,
but those are all deployment options. So when it comes to feature to feature option, as right now,
it's a one-to-one comparison. What runs in open source is what is deployed in cloud.
Like if I build all of my stuff on the open source stuff, I deployed to cloud on occasion to test it,
but I'm constantly building on the open source version and all of my stuff runs in cloud.
What you get when you go to cloud is you get those production features.
You get single sign on, you get role-based access control, you get more advanced metrics
and things of that nature.
You get all of these like things that really matter at a large scale production, things
that large enterprises care about.
Yeah.
And there are ways you can get those in the open source as well.
But they're like, they come like first as first class citizens in the cloud problem.
Maybe you got to write your own, run your own single sign on identity server or something
Yeah.
Yeah. So over here, if I go to the temporal GitHub repo, there's Docker, which has got a Docker
compose, I think something.
Yeah.
Is there? Okay. So I could even,
I think it would be like
temporal and then doc, like I was in the search, I would just search or in the org, I would search
for Docker Compose.
Yeah.
It might be there somewhere.
There we go.
Are you ready?
Yeah.
I'll put that in the links as well.
I'm a huge fan of Docker Compose.
I think it opens up a bunch of great options.
And if you go in here, you can see that there's like the Docker Compose MySQL to Docker Compose
Postgres,
and
then just a bare bones one.
Right.
So if you wanted to self-host it, is this a pretty good way to go?
Yeah, I think it's a great place to start.
I think it always depends on your scale.
Like if you are good at Docker Compose
and you think like the thing with Docker Compose
is like, and I believe this is all gonna deploy it
on a single service or a single server.
So like we always talk about like,
depends on the level of reliability you need of the service
because if the database of the service goes away,
then your reliability goes away.
Like, that's kind of like the truth here
is with that database being the single source of truth,
if that database magically disappears,
you don't
have it.
Now you could do like an RDS or like a digital ocean managed database and connect
that in
to this.
Yeah, run just basically set a off server database connection
string.
Yeah, exactly.
Right, of any form.
Then it's matching the reliability of that database, yeah.
Exactly, yeah.
Yeah.
So another thing, whenever I hear durable, and actually I see a bit about this in the
show notes as well.
And you say retry, like if something goes wrong, we should retry it.
And it probably resume.
Like sometimes it won't.
Sometimes
there's a
poison, what's called a poison message.
Like it's cursed to always fail for
whatever reason.
Like it's trying to get to a service.
The domain is gone or it's not coming back.
Right.
Yep.
One of those sorts of things.
Three months ago, it was there.
Then you said sleep for three months and it woke up and said, wait, it's like
planet of the apes.
You're like, yeah, what have they done?
You wake up.
You're like, the world is not what I thought.
Right.
How do you deal with that kind of stuff?
Yeah, so in the retry policy,
so the default retry policy,
its default is just retry on a specific time limit
forever until it's either canceled or it succeeds.
Now, if you expect that something could happen like that,
essentially what you would do is there's something
what's under non-retriable error types.
So certain HTTP error codes,
you might would be like,
hey, this is just not gonna come back.
500 is fine but maybe 404 is like 404 might never come back but
500 very
likely could
or
cannot connect i don't know is that 404 i don't think so i think
i don't remember yeah i remember
but
there's probably a code that like i i can't connect to the server versus
like i got
there and
it said not here yeah
so there's non-retriable error codes and i mean like what we do with the
the courts and pearl primitives is more of like um i often tell people it's like yeah like things
that can retry, let them retry. But like, say I do a divide by zero error. No amount of retries is
going to change the laws of physics. You know, it's like holding your breath until something
changes. You're just going to pass out. Same thing with these retries. So you have to have what are
called non-retriable errors. And you essentially say, hey, whenever you experience this error,
you should just fail. And basically you would bubble it up and then you have to let the next
layer of execution handle it. So yeah, totally a good story for that.
Okay. Yeah. But you kind of
got to think a little bit about it, right? Just,
yes. Yes. You still have to think it doesn't take
away all the thinking for when it comes to like what potentially could go wrong, but at least like
with all of like the weird, like, you know, okay, this service might go down DNS, someone messed
with DNS. It's always DNS. I had,
I had an, it's always
DNS moment the other day. And I'm like,
I need a sticker for my laptop that says this because it got me again.
I can't remember what took me. I, I suffered something with that as well. And it wasn't even
directly me, but it was something that I was subjected to. Yeah. It is always DNS.
It's always
DNS.
Except for when it's the database. Yeah. Or except for when you accidentally deploy the
Walrus operator on Python 3.7 on the server. That also is not good. And it's not, which I took down
and talked Python for 20 minutes. I'm like, what, why won't it run? It was running perfect. Oh,
this was like, you know, years ago when that,
those things were
like new, right?
Yeah. Oh my
goodness.
So one thing I want to talk about here, let me get back to the right spot.
Let's talk about the programming execution model.
Let's see, is there a quick start?
Let's maybe let's talk to the quick start.
And I think there's just some super interesting modern Python ideas that
you got here.
Right?
So maybe talk us through, like, how do we, how do we get started bringing
this in?
And does it have to be a from scratch or can I take some part of my application, like a particular API endpoint and go, this thing needs some help.
Temporal can help it.
Let's just plug it in on this one bit.
That's actually how we recommend a lot of people get started with Temporal is like we don't we never tell people like do like a whole ground up rewrite of like everything you have.
we i've often told people find something that um like find find a service that annoys you that
pages you because it's constantly going down because it's unreliable and maybe do a like it's
a small service and do a small rewrite of that in temporal and just see how your life makes uh
makes a difference so the way that you do it with temporal is like you have to use the temporal
sdks so the way that you build temporal applications is you build them using sdks
um typically with other workflow-esque engines or other durable execution engines um some of the
more modern durable execution engines have kind of followed suit with us but some of the earlier
ones didn't we're code-based um we're not dag based we're not yaml based we don't have our own
structured dsl we are 100 code-based and there's a lot of advantages to that
and not xml based
no
No,
XML. So yeah, so we build, you build basically what's called a workflow. Workflow is,
you can kind of think of a workflow as like your application. It's the blueprint of your entire
application. And what we'd say about workflows is that they have to be deterministic. Like the code
within a workflow must be deterministic and you execute it line by line going down. And then
anything within your workflow that potentially could be non-deterministic or could potentially
fail. So calling out to a microservice is both of those. It's non-deterministic because you don't
know what you're going to get back. And it's potentially going to fail because the service
could be down. That goes in what's called an activity. An activity is that thing that
automatically gets the retries. Now you implement activities as functions or as methods in Python.
You can actually do them as both. And as you were saying in the readme, yeah, we use a lot of modern
Python tooling. So that's actually something that I think that our SDK engineers, we have an entire
team whose entire job is to build and maintain our SDKs. They're super proud of. It's one of the
things I love talking about. Temporal is not built off of what you would say like an open API spec
for a good reason. So it's built basically, I mean, Temporal itself is built in Go. So as you
can imagine, everything's built in protobuffs. There is a spec on what we build off of, but
open API specs generate stuck stub client libraries. And I've worked with a handful of them.
They don't, they're not very idiomatic to the language. Like it kind of looks like someone
bolted a C library on top of Python. Like it works, but it doesn't feel like Python. Our SDK
engineers spend months studying the programming language, learning out what is idiomatic of the
language, what actually makes sense. And then they build into it. So the interesting thing about this
You can see here when we define our workflows, we define them by decorating classes.
And then we decorate the entry point by decorating it with an at workflow.run.
So that's how we know where the entry point is.
We're using async.io inside of this to do it.
Our activities, when you want to turn a method into an activity,
you are a function in an activity, you just decorate it at activity.defin.
And now you have an activity.
We've done a lot of those kind of things.
we're using context managers very, very a lot or, you know, rigorously within the code base.
The really interesting thing is, and I can only talk a teensy bit about this because it's super
complex, but there's a really great talk track from it at the PyTexas conference from this year.
We built a custom async event loop for this. This runs in a durable asynchronous event loop.
And the SDK engineer who built it gave a talk at PyTexas this year, and it's on the PyTexas
2025 website and I can provide a link to that later. and it's really neat because essentially
we had to build a custom event loop to handle all of the way, the way that we expect temporal to
work. and I don't think that building a custom event loop is a very common thing for people to
do. Um,
so there's a lot
of lessons learned there. Um,
I think there should be more of it though.
I think that's a really interesting story. yeah,
I'll put
this in the show notes.
Yeah, that's Chad's talk.
It's amazing.
So like he talks about all the things that he had to do
when he was building out a custom event loop
for asyncio or for Temporal's asyncio event loop.
Yeah, so for
people for whom this is super new, this idea,
you need places in your code to execute to say,
okay, we can stop, maybe save some state.
And then you talked about like replaying
behaviors
and so on.
So you can write code like await sleep a day,
async
io dot sleep one day and that goes into this as you said durable async io execution
so instead of just saying well we're gonna let the thread do other stuff it's like no save it
and then resume it
right that's
pretty wild it's
pretty great actually yeah and i mean those those
those and that's one of the great things about the workflows and like that those you'd have to
definitely write as workflows but yeah and it takes up no no energy or it doesn't jam up a cpu thread
by sleeping. Like it's usually if you sleep something, that thread is kind of sitting there
and it's stuck. Um,
this a
hundred percent because it's all event sourced under the hood, essentially.
the event, basically the timer started event gets recorded into the service and then it gets
descheduled. And then that worker, that, that executor can continue performing other tasks.
And then once that timer fires, the next task for it to continue execution gets put on the task queue.
The worker consumes it knows, Oh, I need to resume and it resumes. And that can happen whenever that
can happen you know a day from now three days from now three months from now it doesn't matter
eventually gets put on the queue and it gets executed as if nothing happened
yeah that's wild
so interesting question out the audience of if people went with your cloud option
where
does
that run is that aws is that digital ocean
currently it's in uh aws and gcp okay so those are the two
you can pick different
availability zones like if i
were in
virginia
us east
one or whatever i could
say I want to use that one.
Exactly.
There's different availability zones
and we even have multi-region failover.
So if you needed multi-region availability
for super, super high availability,
which we do have definitely have large customers
who need that level of availability.
And you can totally do that.
Cool.
And that doesn't mean you got to be in AWS.
No, no.
We have people who are running on their own private,
they were running on their own infrastructure
on their on-prem and they're calling into it.
So that's the niftiest thing about Temporal Cloud
The security model is super simple because temporal cloud or the temporal service, it doesn't have to be temporal cloud.
It's the service, whether you self-host it or whether it's on the cloud.
It never connects to you.
The workers always do an outbound connection into the temporal service.
So if you're using temporal cloud, the only firewall rule you have to allow is a single outbound connection off of a single port.
That's it.
So it's
really awesome.
Yeah, I'm impressed with a lot of this.
So let's sort of, we're kind of getting to the end.
I want to maybe close out with two topics,
testing and what's next,
or like sort of also maybe multi-language stuff
we should touch on as well.
But let's talk testing first.
So there's a couple of interesting challenges here.
Like first, if I write code like this
and I want to have a unit test,
no longer am I like, well, this is complicated.
I just have to use pytest asyncio.
It's like more than that, right?
So what's the testing story?
Yeah. So the cool thing about the testing story with this is, is it is technically still pytest
Async IO. Because we're code-based, this is one of the things that I always have to harp
to remind people on my courses and everyone's always like, oh, that's so cool. Because we're
code, you have to give up none of your tooling. You don't have to get like, how do you like to
package it? Are you a poetry person? Are you a B person? Are you a Pippin person? Whatever you
want to use, use it. For your testing, do you want to use Poe the Poet? Are you a pytest person?
like, what are you using? Use it. It doesn't matter. Temporal does provide, obviously,
because these are more complex workflows and stuff, they require a little bit. Every single
temporal SDK does provide a testing framework that is built into it. And these integrate natively
with all of your testing frameworks. So you can use, you use pytest. I use pytest. Now you could
use something else, but I, all of our courses, I think the Temporal 102 course. Yeah. I wrote that
one has a whole chapter on testing temporal workflows and activities and mocking activities
because you have to be able to call them independently because you otherwise that's an
integration test it's not a unit test
it is important i always feel bad about mocking the
code it doesn't seem nice but you got to yeah it's
super easy it's so nice uh the you you basically
just re you basically redefine the activity and you're like just put it in then the mocking story
in python is so nice um but you you just use our testing framework and what that does is it basically
the testing framework will automatically spin up a temporal service and a worker for you. So,
because as you can imagine, like the execution part of this is like, you have to have a service
running, you have to have a worker, and then you have to send, like basically use a client to send
a request to execute the workflow and it will be executed. The temporal testing service does all of
that for you. And it also has basically time skipping. So what you can do is, you know,
if I have to test, if I have to test something that sleeps for 30 days, I would actually prefer
it to not actually sleep for 30 days. So I can test it.
Well, I see. I take so long.
Yeah.
So time skipping is in there.
And there's a lot of other really neat features in the testing.
So every single temporal Python, or sorry,
every single temporal SDK has a testing framework built into it
that really well enables testing.
And it all works natively with the tools that you are already used to using
as a developer of whatever language you're already using.
Yeah, that sounds great.
And you can say things like, run this and wait for a week.
And then resume.
And you can just say, and now a week is for Zoom.
A week has passed.
Now I see
what's happened, right?
Like it'll just zip
right ahead.
Yep, skips right ahead, doesn't even worry about it.
That's always a fun testing trick.
So the other one I want to talk about is when I'm over here on the GitHub repo,
I can scroll down.
If I look at the repositories, it's Java SDK, Python SDK, Go SDK,.NET SDK, Ruby SDK, etc., etc.
There's a bunch of interesting things here.
Like I can write part of my app in Java,
part of
the workflow in
Java
or the workflow items in Java, the queues.
And I can do part of it in Python or.NET.
And the other part I think is interesting
is Python,.NET, Ruby, et cetera,
all share a common Rust base.
And so it's kind of like they all go in lockstep.
Yeah, so yeah, two great topics there.
So the first one I'll start off with
is the polyglot stuff
because I think it's one of my favorite things
and I don't ever get to talk about it enough,
so I'm glad you asked.
Underneath the hood,
the way that all of this communication happens
is it's happening via essentially protobuffs
across task cubes to the temporal service back and forth.
One of the things that you'll find
if you dig into temporal
is that we require the inputs and outputs
of your functions to be serializable
to basically protobuffs.
Now, if you have something that's not serializable,
we obviously, because it's code,
we provide you the way to extend the serializer.
So as long as you can serialize it, again, it's code.
You can do whatever you want with it.
But because of that, because everything speaks protobuf,
all of these languages can natively speak to each other.
So you're right.
I can write workflows written in Python
and call and have three different activities
in that workflow, one written in TypeScript,
one written in Java, and one written in.NET.
And I can call them seamlessly,
like basically just by calling execute activity,
giving it the name of the function.
And then I could actually still then pass in a data class
of the data that I have as that parameter
because it's still getting serialized down
into a protobuf.
It will get deserialized into the other language,
execute it and pass back data that I can resume.
And then I could call it technically
from a client that's written in Go.
So this enables polyglot across all of these languages.
And it's amazing.
So if you have legacy systems
or you have stuff where like you really need something
to be written in a whole bunch of different languages,
it just gives you this out of the box for free.
And I think it's one of the neatest features.
And one of the other part
that it really does need about this
is it's not just like the fact that it can call it,
but it also preserves the stack traces as well.
So one of the other courses that I developed
are crafting the error handling strategy course.
There's a demo in there
where I am showing like basically that exact workflow,
a Go client that's calling a Java workflow
that's calling a Python activity.
So three different languages.
And then I intentionally throw an error in the Python activity.
And I tell it, do not handle it.
Do not retry it.
Let it bubble up.
And when I get back to the Go client, I can see the different stack traces in the different
languages all the way through.
So I get a Go, basically panic, that contains a Java stack trace that contains a Python stack
trace.
And I
can
see all of this across the line.
So and also the thing, and just to do it for fun, because I like showing off, I have all
of these workers running on different machines. So I am, I am running on different, I am crossing
process boundaries. I'm crossing literally across the network IP boundaries, and then I'm crossing
language boundaries and it happens seamlessly and you'd never know that it happened.
So the
orchestration layer is, is the wildest thing ever. and then you asked about the rust SDK.
That's a fun one. So that kind of goes back into the history a little bit of how temporal was built
and for a crash course in this within two minutes or less.
Essentially, our founders started at AWS together
and built out what would become,
they built the foundations for SQS
and what would become simple workflow service.
Then one of the founders left,
went to Azure and helped build
the Azure Durable Task Framework at Microsoft.
They met up back together at Uber and built Uber's Cadence.
Cadence was then basically like battle tested for four years,
open sourced, and then they got permission to fork it
and build Temporal.
So Temporal, the company is six years old,
but it was a four-year-old open source project prior.
So it's a 10-year-old open source project, essentially.
But because of that, what happened at Cadence was,
I think they wrote the Go and the Java SDKs there.
So those are very uniquely themselves
because they were written independently.
When they, and then the PHP SDK is its own story.
Someone wrote that in the community
because they really wanted it,
and it kind of follows its own rules.
But when they started building the Temporal SDKs,
TypeScript was the first one and then Python,
if I remember correctly.
They wanted a common core,
like basically re-implementing this
because in these SDKs,
there are very complex state machines
that maintain all of this state of what's going on.
And they did not want to keep re-implementing this
every single time.
So they built a Rust core SDK,
or it's not even an SDK.
It's not an SDK.
It's just the core.
And all of these,
so the TypeScript, the.NET,
the Python and the Ruby SDKs
all have a upper level SDK
that wraps this core Rust SDK and call into it.
So they share a common theme.
So there definitely will sometimes be features
or like things that happen in the Go or the Java SDK
that you're like, that's a little different
because those are not based on Rust core.
But yeah, that's how they all call in.
So like PIO3 is basically being used here.
We're calling with PIO3 into a Rust binding.
Much like Pydantic and others, yeah.
Exactly, yeah.
So, and it's really cool.
And that makes adding new SDKs a lot easier
because really and truly the hardest part
of building the SDKs was like those state machines
used to take a long time.
And once they got it figured out on the Rust core side,
it made adding new languages easier.
The Ruby SDK is in public preview
and will be going generally available here soon.
And there may be one or two more SDKs coming out
within the future.
If you
guessed really hard,
you could figure out what it is.
There's a core that doesn't have an SDK.
there's no secret there's no
there's no secret about that
like yeah of course people
have been
begging for that for years and it's obvious so yeah
may involve crates okay so what's what is the
what's the future like anything that's worth uh giving a shout out that's coming or that kind of
stuff yeah
i mean i think that like a lot of times people often ask me like what is temporal
used for. And I would say Temporal is used for anything that you don't want your code to fail.
It's really interesting to help educate people and work on a product that really does
affect nearly every single part of the software development lifecycle and every single part of
the industry. I was used to working on other products that like, yeah, I worked at a synthetic
data company for a little bit and then at a very niche area. And then I worked at DigitalOcean,
which was cloud products, which is still awesome,
but like doesn't affect everything.
Temporal really does like, are you doing finance?
Temporal is great for long running transactions.
Are you doing food delivery?
Like, are you a fast food industry?
Are you doing groceries?
Are you doing, what are you doing?
Temporal can benefit from it.
So there's a lot of really cool things.
You can use it for anything.
And what we're seeing right now specifically,
and this kind of alludes back to your open AI thing earlier,
is that we're seeing a lot of AI companies
get a lot of value out of this.
because when it becomes time to take your agents to production,
there's a handful of decent production stories out there,
but it turns out these are AI agents in production.
This is microservices in production with a fancy label on top of it.
These are just distributed systems.
Not only are they microservices,
they're very slow, long-running
microservices.
Exactly.
Which make
it harder, yeah.
Yeah, that's exactly what Temporal's model is.
Do you have a slow-running microservice that can sometimes fail?
Great.
We have a product that makes all those problems go away.
So, you know, like I'm working on a lot of content right now around showing the benefit
of Temporal in AI.
And we have a handful of customers who I can't talk about that are using us for lots of different
AI related things.
But I mean, you can look on our blog or anything.
You can see tons of people that are using it.
And it's a really cool thing.
So I would definitely say like if you're trying to take AI to production, you should be looking
into Temporal.
It's not an AI tool.
You know, like we're not we're not going to like we're not going to do the thing that every company did is we're not going to suddenly pivot and become an AI tool because we're not.
We
just we solve everything.
And
AI is one of the
great things we solve.
So.
That's awesome.
Yeah.
You're not going to vibe code with temporal.
Maybe you vibe code temporal code, but not with temporal.
No, I've I've I've actually vibe coded a handful of temporal things.
And it's interesting because like, I'm super picky about what, what people's temporal code
looks like as, because I've been teaching people best practices for three years, almost
three years now.
And I I'm like, no vibe coding.
That's no Claude.
That's wrong.
Like no, no, no cursor.
Like you can't do that.
So, and the interesting thing about that is the way that I'm looking at, it's like, oh,
I need to make more content about this
because, because the
LLMs are not like, it's actually
funny every now and then the LLMs spit out some of my content.
And I can tell when it's my content because I know I write comments in a very particular way.
And I'm like, oh, okay.
So what that ends up telling me is, oh, I need to make more content around this because we're still not vibe coding at 100% capacity.
Yeah.
That's a whole discussion we could go down.
Oh, yeah.
I was totally wrong when we started.
I said we could talk for two hours.
I think it's three or four.
Yeah.
We got so much more we could talk about.
But there's only so much time we can dedicate to each episode.
So let's go ahead and call it.
I say, thanks for being here.
The more I looked into this, this is a super interesting product.
And there's a lot of neat Python integrations,
like you program it with async and await rather than some funky SDK bolt-on thing.
So people should definitely check it out.
Final call to action.
They're interested.
What do you tell them?
Check out, just check out the website. Check out temporal.io or the learn site, learn.temporal.io.
It's a great place to get started. You can install temporal by just running brew install
temporal on your Mac, or there's commands for windows and Linux as well. Curl commands for that.
Or Docker compose up. Or
Docker compose up. If you want to do that, totally can do that.
Just try it out, build a workflow. And then what I tell people is try to break it.
Like start a workflow, kill the worker, bring it back online. Like I think you, it's,
It's really magical when you first actually try to like actually break the software and stuff.
We've had multiple people that have taken jobs here who have said, I started playing with it.
I tried to break it.
And when I couldn't, I decided to apply for a job here.
So try to break it.
See what you see, what you can do.
And you'll be amazed by it.
Like just a personal anecdote.
I remember when I applied here, I was reading through their docs and I told myself, I was like, if they can do half of the things they claim they can do in the docs, this is a, this is revolutionary.
I've never seen anything like this.
And it turns out we do all the things we say in our docs.
It's probably the most interesting tech product
I've ever worked with in my career.
And I know that I will be working with it
probably for the rest of my career.
It fascinates me and I love playing with it.
Like I build temporal applications at home for fun
just because it's like, oh, look,
I don't have to worry about someone's API going down anymore.
Yay.
It's awesome.
So
I hope you enjoy it as much as I do.
I'm pretty impressed.
All right, well, thanks for being on the show.
Thanks for coming on and sharing everything.
Yeah, it was great.
Great to talk with you.
Yeah, you as well.
Bye-bye.